# Aula TP02 (14/02/2025)


>[!TIP]
>The difficulty of challenges/attacks in this script is probably ordered in descending order. It is therefore suggested that you solve them in reverse order (from last to first).

## CBC Padding oracle attack

Solve the challenge proposed in https://cryptopals.com/sets/3/challenges/17.

## CBC-MAC

A block cipher in CBC mode can be used to construct a MAC (see, e.g. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/CBC-MAC). In essence,
- It fixes the IV (e.g. uses a 0-block);
- The authentication tag is the last block of the ciphertext.

### PROG: `cbc_mac.py`

Write a program `cbc_mac.py` that generates the CBC_MAC authentication tag for a given key/message pair. The program should accept the following arguments:
 - `python3 cbc_mac.py tag <key> <file>` -- generates the cbc-mac tag for the contents of file `<file>`, where `<key>` is a base64-encoded 128-bit AES key. The result is the base64-encode of the tag (written to `stdout`);
 - `python3 cbc_mac.py check <key> <file> <tag>` -- checks if `<tag>` is a valid MAC for the contents of `<file>` (with the base64-encoded `<key>`). If the check fails, the program should raise an exception `InvalidTag`.

### PROG: `cbc_mac_attack.py`

The CBC-MAC is only secure for messages of fixed length. In fact, given two pairs `<msg>,<tag>`, it's not difficult to adjust the concatenation of both messages so that the verification will accept the authentication tag of the second message as valid (see details in https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/CBC-MAC#Security_with_fixed_and_variable-length_messages).

Write Python functions to implement the previously described attack on CBC_MAC. Running `python3 cbc_mac_attack.py` should present a concrete example of the attack.

[!NOTE]
> An attack to a MAC consists in constructing a message `<msg>` and a valid  `<tag>` without knowing the corresponding `<key>`(that is, the `<tag>` will be accepted as valid when checked against `<msg>` under an unkown `<key>`). During the attack, it is assumed that the attacker has access to legitimate tags of other messages.


### PROG: `cbc_mac_rnd.py`

Contrary to CBC mode, where a random IV is required, CBC-MAC uses a fixed IV. In fact, defining CBC-MAC with a random IV (where the tag becomes the pair IV/last-ctxt-block) results in an insecure MAC.

Write a program `cbc_mac_rnd.py` that addapts the CBC_MAC construction to use a random IV. The program should accept the same arguments as `cbc_mac.py`.

### QUESTION: Q2

Show how to attack the `cbc_mac_rnd` construction.

### Answer PT-pt:

Embora a utilização de um IV aleatório garanta que mensagens idênticas, cifradas com a mesma chave, resultem em textos cifrados distintos, a reutilização do IV mantém vulnerabilidades.

Dada a construção do algoritmo de cifra, e assumindo que este é corretamente implementado, um atacante que intercepte uma mensagem legítima poderá obter tanto o IV aleatório inicial como a tag gerada. Dado que o IV tem de ser inevitavelmente transmitido para permitir a descodificação da mensagem original.

Assim, mesmo com a utilização de um IV aleatório, uma vez que este precisa de ser transmitido, a cifra continua vulnerável a um ataque semelhante ao cbc_mac de IV fixo. Um adversário poderá, portanto, gerar uma mensagem forjada cuja tag seja idêntica à original.
